.Dd April 17, 2026
.Dt CEST 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm Cest ,
.Nm describe ,
.Nm it ,
.Nm test ,
.Nm expect ,
.Nm expect_array ,
.Nm bench ,
.Nm cest_init ,
.Nm cest_result
.Nd A minimalist, header-only unit testing framework for C, C++, and Objective-C
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In cest.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework is designed to be expressive, lightweight, and easy to integrate. It provides a fluent API inspired by modern JavaScript testing tools like Jest.
.Pp
To use
.Nm ,
simply include the
.In cest.h
header in your test files. Since it is a header-only library, no separate linking is required for the core functionality.
.Sh MACROS
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxxxx"
.It Fn describe "const char *name" "block"
Defines a test suite. The
.Fa block
is a block of code (usually enclosed in braces) containing individual tests.
.It Fn test "const char *name" "block"
.It Fn it "const char *name" "block"
Defines an individual test.
.Nm it
is an alias for
.Nm test .
.It Fn expect "actual"
Starts an assertion chain with the actual value. Context is automatically managed.
.It Fn expect_array "actual" "size_t len"
Starts an assertion for an array of length
.Fa len .
.El
.Sh MATCHERS
Commonly used matchers:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxxxx"
.It Fn toBe "expected"
Checks for strict equality.
.It Fn toEqual "expected"
Alias for
.Nm toBe .
.It Fn toBeGreaterThan "expected"
Checks if actual > expected.
.It Fn toBeLessThan "expected"
Checks if actual < expected.
.It Fn toBeInRange "min" "max"
Checks if actual is within [min, max].
.It Fn toBeNull
Checks if a pointer is NULL.
.It Fn toBeDefined
Checks if a pointer is not NULL.
.It Fn toBeUndefined
Checks if a pointer is NULL.
.It Fn toBeTruthy
Checks if a value evaluates to true.
.It Fn toBeFalsy
Checks if a value evaluates to false.
.It Fn toContain "substring"
Checks if a string contains another substring.
.It Fn toBeCloseTo "value" "precision"
Compares doubles with specific precision.
.El
.Sh HOOKS
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Fn beforeEach "void (*fn)(void)"
Runs before each test in the suite.
.It
.Fn afterEach "void (*fn)(void)"
Runs after each test in the suite.
.It
.Fn beforeAll "void (*fn)(void)"
Runs once before all tests in the suite.
.It
.Fn afterAll "void (*fn)(void)"
Runs once after all tests in the suite.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Define these preprocessor macros before including
.In cest.h :
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxx"
.It Dv CEST_ENABLE_LEAK_DETECTION
Enables memory leak detection using internal wrappers.
.It Dv CEST_ENABLE_SIGNAL_HANDLER
Enables crash diagnostics (SIGSEGV, etc.). Requires calling
.Fn cest_init
in
.Fn main .
.It Dv CEST_PREFIX
Enables namespaced macros (e.g.,
.Nm cest_describe ,
.Nm cest_expect ).
.It Dv CEST_NO_COLORS
Disables colored terminal output (can also be passed as -DCEST_NO_COLORS to the compiler).
.It Dv CEST_THREAD_SAFE
Enables thread safety (requires pthreads).
.El
.Sh FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxx"
.It Fn cest_init "int argc" "char **argv"
Initializes the framework with CLI arguments. Mandatory for test filtering and signal handlers.
.It Fn cest_result
Returns 0 if all tests passed, 1 otherwise. Also prints the final summary.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Basic usage:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <cest.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    cest_init(argc, argv);

    describe("Math Suite", {
        it("adds properly", {
            expect(2 + 2).toBe(4);
        });
    });

    return cest_result();
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
The online documentation at
.Lk https://github.com/KitsuneSemCalda/Cest
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
framework was created by the Cest contributors.
